I thought a bit about this during my drive this morning and it occurred to me it's all about motivation like anything else.  You'll need a combination of extrinsic and intrinsic motivation if you're going to be successful with any game.
Extrinsic could be anything from a score to in game money (I call dibs on calling the money Eurios with the symbol Œ or HomeBucks with a stylelized HB) to having special badges next to your chat name to achievements to statistics to steam trading cards or achievements.  This can also be linked to progression as in you need X amount of points/money to unlock a new engine or part category.  This MUST be optional or you’ll cripple a lot of the more creative/casual/active experimental players with one stroke.
Intrinsic rewards are a little trickier.  A lot of why you and I play HB is because we like to experiment and do things “because we can”.  We like to make our own challenges and follow through with them.  We’d haul cargo across all HBLand in a jeep because it’s relaxing and you feel like you’re being useful.  Double points since it is our vehicle we designed for the purpose.  A lot of this is tied in with a sense of being and a sense of accomplishment.  This is usually based on a person’s personal interests (look at my ships for example!) plus the flavor text that encourages us to continue.
How many of you play HB (or any game) for a while, lose interest and then suddenly a patch comes out and you play it again for some more time?
Any system or game mode should approach these questions from the full spectrum if you’re going to interest enough people.  How do you motivate the people who like to set their own goals and challenges and how do you motivate people who like a way to show their accomplishment off?
I think Niv has hit on this a lot already with the concept of areas each having their own learning targets plus a sense of achievement.  Here’s a broken car, make it go.  Now make it go fast.  Now finish the race in 1:30.   BONUS GOAL: Finish in 1:20.  Award: New knowledge and accomplishment (intrinsic), some kind of achievement (extrinsic depending on how you do it).  If you were very clever, you’d make the end goal tiered for an even greater sense of achievement (getting silver, gold, platinum, diamond times or even worse, a progressive time adjustment!).
I would propose a full spectrum approach:  Create an objecting that requires the player to contribute to a larger project.  E.g. instead of delivering lumber, you’re doing it a job site where a building is constructed depending on how much you deliver.  It’s only done when you’ve delivered enough.  Each load gets you a set amount of homebucks that you can stockpile for now (or show on a global leaderboard that is seen in game, not hard to set up) and later can be used to unlock more powerful engines or larger fuel tanks, or even tangible benefits like little horsepower, economy or even weight boons.  Accomplishment of the greater project gets the player a customizable bonus such as a different player model (or control over its color!) or a little cosmetic bonus (a lumberjack hat anyone?).
Now the catch here is that most players will get the gold so to speak and leave it be.  But what if this unlocked a mode where players could spend lumber the deliver to design and construct their own structures or use it to earn more homebucks to buy things later on?  Don’t forget to make it so a quicker and heavier loading design has the ability to earn money quicker, a simple way to encourage people to not win and then give up.
The openTTD (or simutrans or transport sim or railroad tycoon) people will want to be able to set up infrastructure between different resource nodes and for them the goal is optimum efficiency or just earnings.
One unique thing homebrew has going that it must abuse is multiplayer.  Imagine everyone in a server racing to deliver the most.  Or even better, working cooperatively towards making a single building or set of infrastructures.  If you really want to go too far, imagine a game mode dedicated to AIs attacking said infrastructure, resource nodes, or player vehicles.  Now you’ve got a totally new game!